---
title: "Book notes: Analysis of Phylogenetics and Evolution with R"
date: 2024-12-26
permalink: /posts/2024-10-16/APE
categories:
  - Book notes
tags:
  - Phylogenetics
toc: true
# last_modified_at: 2024-09-01
---

*Analysis of Phylogenetics and Evolution with R* by Emmanuel Paradis is suggested by John and I am reading it now. This post contains my notes on this book. Emmanuel Paradis is the author of the `ape` package in R, I think this will be the best resource if handling phylogenetic data in R. It should also be a good proxy if I want to learn more about fundamental concepts in computational evolution.

# Phylogenetic data in R

## Phylogenetic Data as R Objects

### Trees

The Class "phylo" (ape):
  - edge: a matrix with two columns, each row represents an edge in the tree. the $n$ tips are numbered from 1 to $n$, and the $m$ (internal) nodes from $n+1$ to $n+m$ (the root being $n + 1$). 
  - edge.length: a vector of edge lengths.
  - tip.label: a vector of tip labels.
  - Nnode: the number of internal nodes.
  - node.label: a vector of node labels.
  - root.edge: the edge leading to the root.

### Networks

Very often, networks are analyzed as a sum of distinct trees: migration or horizontal gene transfer results in reticulations among populations or species but the genetic lineages have a tree-like dynamics. The class "evonet" is used to store networks.

### Splits

A split (or bipartition) is a pair of two exclusive sets of tips (or taxa). The class "prop.part" is used to store splits.

### Molecular Sequences

This part is interesting as different packages handle molecular sequences in different ways. 

The Class "DNAbin" (ape):
  - Each nucleotide is coded by a single byte (8 bits).
  - 0123: AGCT
  - 4: Is the base known?
  - 5: Alignment gap?
  - 6: Unknown character?
  - 7: (unused)

This approach is can also record the ambiguity of the nucleotide.

The Class "alignment" (seqinr):
  - `nb`: the number of sequences.
  - `seq`: the sequences as a vector of mode character
  - `nam`: the names of the sequences.

### Allelic Data

### Phenotypic Data

## Reading Phylogenetic Data

### Phylogenies

